# **Blockchain: Key Principles** ([stable link](https://nchikurova.github.io/history-of-blockchain/key-principles/))

Capstone project for the MS Data Analysis & Visualization at The Graduate Center, CUNY.

## Abstract
  In October 2008 an unknown individual or a group of individuals under the name of Satoshi Nakomoto published a white paper [“Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System,”](https://nakamotoinstitute.org/bitcoin/) in which Bitcoin was described as “an electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of trust, allowing any two willing parties to transact directly with each other without the need for a trusted third party”. 

  Bitcoin was launched in January 2009 and became the first successful cryptocurrency. Nowadays there are thousands of cryptocurrencies in the world. However, despite the cryptocurrencies’ popularity, not everyone understands what they are and how they can affect our future. There are two main questions I want to address in this project. First, is the history leading up to the creation of cryptocurrencies? Second, do cryptocurrencies have real value? I believe the real value of cryptocurrencies is in the technology they are built on – blockchain. 
  
  **“The Blockchain: Key Principles” is an interactive visual project that explains the importance of data privacy and security, decentralized computing, and open-source software in the modern digital world through the history of the underlying principles of blockchain technology.**
  
  Some of these key concepts have their roots in the time before the Information Age. By explaining the history of these principles, I want to present the fact that over the past centuries, humanity has been fighting for their privacy, security, and the ability to efficiently express themselves one way or another. Blockchain technology, which was introduced to the public in 2008 through a White Paper and launched in 2009 as Bitcoin cryptocurrency, provides the opportunity to achieve these goals. 
  
  **“The biggest threat to privacy that we face is that the power of computing is doubling every 18 months. The human population is not doubling every 18 months but the ability for computers to keep track of us is,” says Phil Zimmerman, reminding us of [Moore’s Law](https://www.umsl.edu/~siegelj/information_theory/projects/Bajramovic/www.umsl.edu/_abdcf/Cs4890/link1.html).**
  
  Zimmerman is the inventor of [Pretty Good Privacy](https://nakamotoinstitute.org/why-i-wrote-pgp/), which is software that provides data communication privacy through encryption (2002). While initially blockchain technology was created to improve the financial industry, the structure of blockchain, which allows users to store, validate and transmit data, provides transparency, decentralization, and trust and could also be profitable in other economic, legal, and political systems.

## How it all started

The idea of this capstone project came from my final project for the Alternative Data Culture course. This course aimed to explore alternative approaches to representing and understanding data, searching for hidden interpretation, and embracing subjective perspectives to generate new knowledge and create new meanings. We studied the aesthetics of text, art, digital images, and movies as objects of data visualization. One of the concepts that stood out for me was the interpretation of human thought through digital representation. In her book SpecLab: Digital Aesthetics and Projects in Speculative Computing, Johanna Drucker argues that code is material, and every digital piece is the presentation of human thought:

  > In every generation, some version of this question has been posted: If it were possible to understand the logic of human thought, would there be a perfect    representation of it in some unambiguous, diagrammatic symbol set? This question, informed by classical metaphysics and philosophy, persists not only in contemporary struggles within the very different domains of visual art, information design, and computer graphics, but also in early formulations of cognitive science, with proximity to symbolic logic, and in debates over artificial intelligence (Drucker).
  
As the object of my research, I chose a relatively new at that time movement in digital art – NFTs. As [my final project](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1al0kxoeDN9DfCD_8OcwiPfoXEetTXNq6/view), I explored NFTs (Non-Fungible Tokens) as a form of the interpretation of the human mind in the digital environment. By creating this project, I learned that the main value of NFTs is their uniqueness. Each of these digital projects has a certificate of authenticity, which is provided by the technology they are built on – blockchain. By learning more about blockchain and what can be created with it, I became interested in the initial purpose of creating it as well as its impact on our future.

## The future of the project

There are many different documentaries, videos, articles, and books that explain the history and timeline of the evolution of digital money. However, I haven’t seen any interactive visual projects presented on a webpage that users can explore at their own pace. For viewers who are new to this topic, it might be difficult to understand information as fast as it is presented in the documentaries and videos. Also, those people who absorb information more easily through visual medium might find it hard to read long articles and books. Therefore, I plan to continue this project in the future to provide a more interactive approach.
  
Despite technological advancement, the future of Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies’ is still uncertain, and the high natural resources consumption problem has yet to be solved. However, it is almost impossible to take control over Bitcoin mining, even for the government. One of the main reasons for it is the anonymity of Bitcoin’s inventor. This leads me to the first possible project extension.
  
 ### The Mystery of Satosho Nakomoto
 
 While this topic is more entertaining than educational, the question of Bitcoin’s inventor is one of the most discussed not only in the crypto community, but all over the world. It involves a lot of research and logical thinking and remains unsolved. Satoshi Nakomoto is the name that was used by Bitcoin’s creator. Pseudonymity allows the project to stay neutral since there is no charismatic leader behind Bitcoin, and the project cannot be associated with any personality. Pseudonymity also protects the founder from any type of attack or government control. 
 
Satoshi Nakomoto was the first figure who worked on digital money and decided to stay unknown. All previous people who ever worked on digital money projects revealed their real names: David Chaum (“DigiCash”), Adam Back (“HashCash”), Wei Dai (“B-Money”), Nick Szabo (“BitGold”). A few years after announcing the project, Nakomoto disappeared leaving the code of Bitcoin as open-source software and giving the chance to other developers to work on and improve this code. There are many theories about who Satoshi Nakomoto is. Bitcoin’s creator might be an individual, a group of individuals or even an organization. 
  
The first possible candidate is Harold Finney. Hal Finney is a software developer who was advocating for cryptography and digital privacy, also known as the first person who helped Satoshi (“The Wall Street Journal”). The first-ever Bitcoin transaction was between Nakomoto and Hal Finney. In addition, Hal Finney was a neighbor of the person named Dorian Satoshi Nakomoto, who had no knowledge about the technical side of Bitcoin when asked. Hal Finney, however, denied being Satoshi Nakomoto (Finney). Harold Finney died from complications of Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in 2014. 
  
Another personality that some might think is behind the name of Satoshi Nakomoto is Adam Back. Adam Back is the founder of HashCash, one of the early attempts at creating digital money, which introduced the Proof-of-Work mechanism. Since Nakomoto communicated only digitally, his emails are one of the factors that are under close examination (“Bitcoin P2P E-Cash Paper”). Adam Back’s email replies to other bitcoiners show that his technical understanding of blockchain was more advanced than others. Adam also had the right set of skills, experience, writing patterns, and his absence in the time of Satoshi being around – all these facts are the evidence of the theory that Adam Back can potentially be Satoshi Nakomoto (“The Strange Story of Satoshi Nakomoto’s Spelling Choices”).
  
A third possible candidate is Nick Szabo, the creator of Bit Gold, another early attempt at creating digital cryptocurrency, and the idea of smart contracts, which was introduced in his paper “Smart Contracts: Building Blocks for Digital Markets” in 1996 (Szabo). He was also not as active as other cryptocurrencies activists in the time of Satoshi Nakomoto’s presence, despite the fact that Bit Gold is one of the prototypes of Bitcoin. Interestingly, there is no reference to Bit Gold in Bitcoin white paper, even though there are clear similarities in between their systems used to process transactions and to secure the decentralized network.
  
Besides names mentioned above, there are several more personalities that are connected to Satoshi Nakomoto’s name. However, the candidates above are the most well-known people who are related to Nakomoto and Bitcoin and all of them are members of the cypherpunk community, which leads me to the next possible extension of my project. 

